3_operators_and_decision_making.md, before:

# Operators

We'll go through basic arithmetic and logic operators on different variable types.
Bourne shell didn't originally have any mechanism to perform simple arithmetic operations, but it uses external programs, either **awk** or **expr**. We'll use expr.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
val=`expr 1 + 1`
# note the spacing, `expr 1+1` does not work (it returns 1+1)
# `expr 1 +1` and `expr 1+ 1` don't work either
echo "Sum : $val"
2
```

## Arithmetic operators

| Operator | Description                                                                     | 
|----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| +        | Addition: `expr $x + $y` will give the sum of x and y.                          |
| -        | Subtraction: `expr $x - $y` will subtract y from x.                             |
| *        | Multiplication: `expr $x * $y` will give the produce of x and y.                |
| /        | Division: `expr $x / $y` will give the quotient of x divided by y.              |
| %        | Modulus: `expr $x % $y` will give the reminder of x divided by y.               |
| ==       | Equality: [ $x == $y ] will return true is x equals y, false otherwise.         |
| =        | Assignment: x = $y x takes the value of y.                                      |
| !=       | Negated Equality: [ $x != $y ] will return false is x equals y, true otherwise. |

```bash
A=2
B=3

echo "`expr $A + $B`"    # 5
```

## Relational operators

| Operator  | Description                                                                                      | 
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| -eq       | Equals: [ $x -eq $y ] Same as [ $x == $y ]                                                       |
| -ne       | Not Equals [ $x -ne $y ] Same as [ $x != $y ]                                                    |
| -gt       | Greater than: [ $x -gt $y ] true if x holds a greater value than y.                              |
| -lt       | Lower than: [ $x -lt $y ] true if x holds a lower value than y.                                  |
| -ge       | Greater than or equal to: [ $x -ge $y ] true if x holds a greater value than y or if x equals y. |
| -le       | Lower than or equal to: [ $x -le $y ] true if x holds a lower value than y or if x equals y.     |                   

## Boolean operators

| Operator | Description                                                | 
|----------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| !        | Logical NOT [ ! false ] is true.                           |
| -o       | Logical OR [ $x -o $y ] is true if either x or y is true.  |
| -a       | Logical AND [ $x -a $y ] is true if either x or y is true. |

## File operators

| Operator   | Description                                                                   | 
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| -b         | Checks if file is a block special file.                                       |
| -c         | Checks if file is a character special file.                                   |
| -d         | Checks if file is a directory.                                                |
| -f         | Checks if file is an ordinary file as opposed to a directory or special file. |
| -g         | Checks if file has its set group ID (SGID) bit set.                           |
| -k         | Checks if file has its sticky bit set.                                        |
| -e         | Checks if file exists; is true even if file is a directory but exists.        |
| -r         | Checks if file is readable.                                                   |
| -w         | Checks if file is writable.                                                   |
| -x         | Checks if file is executable.                                                 |
| -s         | Checks if the file size is greater than 0.                                    |

## String operators

| Operator | Description                                                                          | 
|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| =        | Checks if the values of two strings are equal.                                       |
| !=       | Checks if the values of two strings are not equal.                                   |
| -z       | Checks if the given string operand size is zero.                                     |
| -n       | Checks if the given string operand size is non-zero.                                 |
| str      | Checks if str is not the empty string. [ $s ] is true if s holds a non-empty string. |

## Decision-making (if, case)

We use some of the above operators for decision-making. The syntax for **if** and **case** statements is illustrated bellow.
```text
if [ expression ] 
then 
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression is true 
fi
```
```text

if [ expression ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression is true
else
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression is not true
fi
```
```text
if [ expression 1 ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression 1 is true
elif [ expression 2 ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression 2 is true
elif [ expression 3 ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression 3 is true
else
   Statement(s) to be executed if no expression is true
fi
```
```text
case constant in
   pattern1)
      Statement(s) to be executed if pattern1 matches
      ;;
   pattern2)
      Statement(s) to be executed if pattern2 matches
      ;;
   pattern3)
      Statement(s) to be executed if pattern3 matches
      ;;
   *)
     Default condition to be executed
     ;;
esac
```

Sample script:
```bash
#!/bin/bash

a=10
b=20

# you can use all the relational operators here
if [ $a == $b ]
then
   echo "a is equal to b"
fi

WORD="a"

case "$WORD" in
   "a") echo "a" 
   ;;
   "b") echo "b" 
   ;;
   "c") echo "c" 
   ;;
esac
```

### Practice time

Write a script that has three variables and outputs the one holding the greatest value.

Commit message:

removed practice, made some adjustments

3_operators_and_decision_making.md, after:

# Operators

We'll go through basic arithmetic and logic operators on different variable types.
Bourne shell didn't originally have any mechanism to perform simple arithmetic operations, but it uses external programs, either **awk** or **expr**. We'll use expr.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
val=`expr 1 + 1`
# note the spacing, `expr 1+1` does not work (it returns 1+1)
# `expr 1 +1` and `expr 1+ 1` don't work either
echo "Sum : $val"
2
```

## Arithmetic operators

| Operator | Description                                                                     | 
|----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| +        | Addition: `expr $x + $y` will give the sum of x and y.                          |
| -        | Subtraction: `expr $x - $y` will subtract y from x.                             |
| *        | Multiplication: `expr $x * $y` will give the produce of x and y.                |
| /        | Division: `expr $x / $y` will give the quotient of x divided by y.              |
| %        | Modulus: `expr $x % $y` will give the reminder of x divided by y.               |
| ==       | Equality: [ $x == $y ] will return true is x equals y, false otherwise.         |
| =        | Assignment: x = $y x takes the value of y.                                      |
| !=       | Negated Equality: [ $x != $y ] will return false is x equals y, true otherwise. |

```bash
A=2
B=3

echo "`expr $A + $B`"    # 5
```

## Relational operators

| Operator  | Description                                                                                      | 
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| -eq       | Equals: [ $x -eq $y ] Same as [ $x == $y ]                                                       |
| -ne       | Not Equals [ $x -ne $y ] Same as [ $x != $y ]                                                    |
| -gt       | Greater than: [ $x -gt $y ] true if x holds a greater value than y.                              |
| -lt       | Lower than: [ $x -lt $y ] true if x holds a lower value than y.                                  |
| -ge       | Greater than or equal to: [ $x -ge $y ] true if x holds a greater value than y or if x equals y. |
| -le       | Lower than or equal to: [ $x -le $y ] true if x holds a lower value than y or if x equals y.     |                   

## Boolean operators

| Operator | Description                                                | 
|----------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| !        | Logical NOT [ ! false ] is true.                           |
| -o       | Logical OR [ $x -o $y ] is true if either x or y is true.  |
| -a       | Logical AND [ $x -a $y ] is true if either x or y is true. |

## File operators

| Operator   | Description                                                                   | 
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| -b         | Checks if file is a block special file.                                       |
| -c         | Checks if file is a character special file.                                   |
| -d         | Checks if file is a directory.                                                |
| -f         | Checks if file is an ordinary file as opposed to a directory or special file. |
| -g         | Checks if file has its set group ID (SGID) bit set.                           |
| -k         | Checks if file has its sticky bit set.                                        |
| -e         | Checks if file exists; is true even if file is a directory but exists.        |
| -r         | Checks if file is readable.                                                   |
| -w         | Checks if file is writable.                                                   |
| -x         | Checks if file is executable.                                                 |
| -s         | Checks if the file size is greater than 0.                                    |

## String operators

| Operator | Description                                                                          | 
|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| =        | Checks if the values of two strings are equal.                                       |
| !=       | Checks if the values of two strings are not equal.                                   |
| -z       | Checks if the given string operand size is zero.                                     |
| -n       | Checks if the given string operand size is non-zero.                                 |
| str      | Checks if str is not the empty string. [ $s ] is true if s holds a non-empty string. |

## Decision-making (if, case)

We use some of the above operators for decision-making. The syntax for **if** and **case** statements is illustrated bellow.
```text
if [ expression ] 
then 
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression is true 
fi
```
```text

if [ expression ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression is true
else
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression is not true
fi
```
```text
if [ expression 1 ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression 1 is true
elif [ expression 2 ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression 2 is true
elif [ expression 3 ]
then
   Statement(s) to be executed if expression 3 is true
else
   Statement(s) to be executed if no expression is true
fi
```
```text
case constant in
   pattern1)
      Statement(s) to be executed if pattern1 matches
      ;;
   pattern2)
      Statement(s) to be executed if pattern2 matches
      ;;
   pattern3)
      Statement(s) to be executed if pattern3 matches
      ;;
   *)
     Default condition to be executed
     ;;
esac
```

Sample script:
```bash
#!/bin/bash

A=10
B=20

# you can use all the relational operators here
if [ $A == $B ]
then
   echo "a is equal to b"
else 
   echo "a is not equal to b"
fi

WORD="a"

case "$WORD" in
   "a") echo "a" 
   ;;
   "b") echo "b" 
   ;;
   "c") echo "c" 
   ;;
esac

# create file myfile beforehand
FILENAME=myfile
# we can also get the filename as input from console
# read filename

if [ -c $FILENAME ]
then
   echo "$FILENAME is a text file"
else
   echo "$FILENAME is not a text file"
fi
```
